Declaration of Astana

WHO/HIS/SDS/2018.61
© World Health Organization and the United Nations Children’s Fund (UNICEF), 2018. Some rights reserved. This 
work is available under the CC BY-NC-SA 3.0 IGO licence.

Global Conference on Primary Health Care 
From Alma-Ata towards universal health coverage
and the Sustainable Development Goals
Astana, Kazakhstan, 25 and 26 October 2018
We, Heads of State and Government, ministers and representatives of States and Governments1, 
participating in the Global Conference on Primary Health Care: From Alma-Ata towards universal 
health coverage and the Sustainable Development Goals, meeting in Astana on 25 and 26 
October 2018, reaffirming the commitments expressed in the ambitious and visionary Declaration 
of Alma-Ata of 1978 and the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, in pursuit of Health for 
All, hereby make the following Declaration.
We envision
Governments and societies that prioritize, promote and protect people’s health and 
well-being, at both population and individual levels, through strong health systems;
Primary health care and health services that are high quality, safe, comprehensive, 
integrated, accessible, available and affordable for everyone and everywhere, provided 
with compassion, respect and dignity by health professionals who are well-trained, skilled, 
motivated and committed;
Enabling and health-conducive environments in which individuals and communities 
are empowered and engaged in maintaining and enhancing their health and well-being;
Partners and stakeholders aligned in providing effective support to national health 
policies, strategies and plans.
1  As well as representatives of regional economic integration organizations.


I
We strongly affirm our commitment to the fundamental right of every human being to the enjoyment of the 
highest attainable standard of health without distinction of any kind. Convening on the fortieth anniversary of 
the Declaration of Alma-Ata, we reaffirm our commitment to all its values and principles, in particular to justice 
and solidarity, and we underline the importance of health for peace, security and socioeconomic development, 
and their interdependence.
II
We are convinced that strengthening primary health care (PHC) is the most inclusive, effective and efficient 
approach to enhance people’s physical and mental health, as well as social well-being, and that PHC is a 
cornerstone of a sustainable health system for universal health coverage (UHC) and health-related Sustainable 
Development Goals. We welcome the convening in 2019 of the United Nations General Assembly high-level 
meeting on UHC, to which this Declaration will contribute. We will each pursue our paths to achieving UHC so 
that all people have equitable access to the quality and effective health care they need, ensuring that the use of 
these services does not expose them to financial hardship.
III
We acknowledge that in spite of remarkable progress over the last 40 years, people in all parts of the world 
still have unaddressed health needs. Remaining healthy is challenging for many people, particularly the poor 
and people in vulnerable situations. We find it ethically, politically, socially and economically unacceptable that 
inequity in health and disparities in health outcomes persist.
We will continue to address the growing burden of noncommunicable diseases, which lead to poor health 
and premature deaths due to tobacco use, the harmful use of alcohol, unhealthy lifestyles and behaviours, 
and insufficient physical activity and unhealthy diets. Unless we act immediately, we will continue to lose lives 
prematurely because of wars, violence, epidemics, natural disasters, the health impacts of climate change 
and extreme weather events and other environmental factors. We must not lose opportunities to halt disease 
outbreaks and global health threats such as antimicrobial resistance that spread beyond countries’ boundaries.
Promotive, preventive, curative, rehabilitative services and palliative care must be accessible to all. We must 
save millions of people from poverty, particularly extreme poverty, caused by disproportionate out-of-pocket 
spending on health. We can no longer underemphasize the crucial importance of health promotion and disease 
prevention, nor tolerate fragmented, unsafe or poor-quality care. We must address the shortage and uneven 
distribution of health workers. We must act on the growing costs of health care and medicines and vaccines. We 
cannot afford waste in health care spending due to inefficiency.

We commit to:
IV
Make bold political choices for health across all sectors
We reaffirm the primary role and responsibility of Governments at all levels in promoting and protecting the 
right of everyone to the enjoyment of the highest attainable standard of health. We will promote multisectoral 
action and UHC, engaging relevant stakeholders and empowering local communities to strengthen PHC. We 
will address economic, social and environmental determinants of health and aim to reduce risk factors by 
mainstreaming a Health in All Policies approach. We will involve more stakeholders in the achievement of Health 
for All, leaving no one behind, while addressing and managing conflicts of interest, promoting transparency 
and implementing participatory governance. We will strive to avoid or mitigate conflicts that undermine health 
systems and roll back health gains. We must use coherent and inclusive approaches to expand PHC as a pillar of 
UHC in emergencies, ensuring the continuum of care and the provision of essential health services in line with 
humanitarian principles. We will appropriately provide and allocate human and other resources to strengthen 
PHC. We applaud the leadership and example of Governments who have demonstrated strong support for PHC.
V
Build sustainable primary health care
PHC will be implemented in accordance with national legislation, contexts and priorities. We will strengthen 
health systems by investing in PHC. We will enhance capacity and infrastructure for primary care – the 
first contact with health services – prioritizing essential public health functions. We will prioritize disease 
prevention and health promotion and will aim to meet all people’s health needs across the life course through 
comprehensive preventive, promotive, curative, rehabilitative services and palliative care. PHC will provide a 
comprehensive range of services and care, including but not limited to vaccination; screenings; prevention, 
control and management of noncommunicable and communicable diseases; care and services that promote, 
maintain and improve maternal, newborn, child and adolescent health; and mental health and sexual and 
reproductive health2. PHC will also be accessible, equitable, safe, of high quality, comprehensive, efficient, 
acceptable, available and affordable, and will deliver continuous, integrated services that are people-centred 
and gender-sensitive. We will strive to avoid fragmentation and ensure a functional referral system between 
primary and other levels of care. We will benefit from sustainable PHC that enhances health systems’ resilience 
to prevent, detect and respond to infectious diseases and outbreaks.
2  In joining consensus, the delegation of the United States of America wishes to draw attention to objective 8.25 of the Programme of Action of the Report of the 
International Conference on Population and Development, which states “in no case should abortion be promoted as a method of family planning”. 


The success of primary 
health care will be driven by:
Knowledge and capacity-building. We will apply 
knowledge, including scientific as well as traditional 
knowledge, to strengthen PHC, improve health 
outcomes and ensure access for all people to the right 
care at the right time and at the most appropriate level 
of care, respecting their rights, needs, dignity and 
autonomy. We will continue to research and share 
knowledge and experience, build capacity and improve 
the delivery of health services and care.
Human resources for health. We will create 
decent work and appropriate compensation for 
health professionals and other health personnel 
working at the primary health care level to 
respond effectively to people’s health needs in 
a multidisciplinary context. We will continue to 
invest in the education, training, recruitment, 
development, motivation and retention of 
the PHC workforce, with an appropriate skill 
mix. We will strive for the retention and 
availability of the PHC workforce in rural, 
remote and less developed areas. We 
assert that the international migration of 
health personnel should not undermine 
countries’, particularly developing 
countries’, ability to meet the health 
needs of their populations.

Technology. We support broadening and extending access 
to a range of health care services through the use of high-
quality, safe, effective and affordable medicines, including, as 
appropriate, traditional medicines, vaccines, diagnostics and 
other technologies. We will promote their accessibility and 
their rational and safe use and the protection of personal data. 
Through advances in information systems, we will be better 
able to collect appropriately disaggregated, high-quality data 
and to improve information continuity, disease surveillance, 
transparency, accountability and monitoring of health system 
performance. We will use a variety of technologies to improve 
access to health care, enrich health service delivery, improve 
the quality of service and patient safety, and increase the 
efficiency and coordination of care. Through digital and other 
technologies, we will enable individuals and communities to 
identify their health needs, participate in the planning and 
delivery of services and play an active role in maintaining their 
own health and well-being.
Financing. We call on all countries to continue to invest 
in PHC to improve health outcomes. We will address the 
inefficiencies and inequities that expose people to financial 
hardship resulting from their use of health services by ensuring 
better allocation of resources for health, adequate financing of 
primary health care and appropriate reimbursement systems in 
order to improve access and achieve better health outcomes. 
We will work towards the financial sustainability, efficiency and 
resilience of national health systems, appropriately allocating 
resources to PHC based on national context. We will leave no 
one behind, including those in fragile situations and conflict-
affected areas, by providing access to quality PHC services 
across the continuum of care.

VI
Empower individuals and communities.
 We support the involvement of individuals, families, communities and civil society 
through their participation in the development and implementation of policies and plans 
that have an impact on health. We will promote health literacy and work to satisfy the 
expectations of individuals and communities for reliable information about health. We will 
support people in acquiring the knowledge, skills and resources needed to maintain their 
health or the health of those for whom they care, guided by health professionals. We 
will protect and promote solidarity, ethics and human rights. We will increase community 
ownership and contribute to the accountability of the public and private sectors for more 
people to live healthier lives in enabling and health-conducive environments.
VII
Align stakeholder support to national policies, strategies and plans. 
We call on all stakeholders – health professionals, academia, patients, civil society, 
local and international partners, agencies and funds, the private sector, faith-based 
organizations and others – to align with national policies, strategies and plans across 
all sectors, including through people-centred, gender-sensitive approaches, and to 
take joint actions to build stronger and sustainable PHC towards achieving UHC. 
Stakeholder support can assist countries to direct sufficient human, technological, 
financial and information resources to PHC. In implementing this Declaration, countries 
and stakeholders will work together in a spirit of partnership and effective development 
cooperation, sharing knowledge and good practices while fully respecting national 
sovereignty and human rights.

• We will act on this Declaration in 
solidarity and coordination between 
Governments, the World Health 
Organization, the United Nations 
Children’s Fund and all other 
stakeholders.
• All people, countries and 
organizations are encouraged to 
support this movement.
• Countries will periodically review 
the implementation of this 
Declaration, in cooperation with 
stakeholders. 
• Together we can and will achieve 
health and well-being for all, 
leaving no one behind.

